layout: post
title:  "Kicks + Covid"
author: Valentina
categories: sneakers, 
tags: [ sneakers ]
image: assets/images/2.jpg
rating: 4.5
---

Sneakerheads everywhere at this very moment are hunched over computer screens, brows beading with sweat in the fluorescent glow of the monitor as they try in vain to secure possession of exclusive sneakers that are being launched online. The faint smell of cardboard hangs in the air around them, oozing from the stacks of shoeboxes shrouded in the shadows of their bedrooms. Yes, they still live with their parents but not out of choice - out of dedication to the craft, to the financial strain but spiritual gain of collecting and reselling sneakers. Nothing will stop them. They may have lost the ability to walk down the street to the store, but they haven’t lost the ability to revel in their latest purchase, the high of receiving a new pair in the mail and the ecstasy of wearing them for the first time. 

In the exclusive and limited sneaker industry, queues of kids (by which I mean 30-year-old men dressed in Supreme) bending around street corners are the visual marker of hype - a word that is thrown around but was born out of the sneaker world. Physical queues serve as a visual aid that something big is happening at the local Footlocker, causing boomers driving past in their Honda Accords to crank down the window and ask a politely baffled question to the nearest bumbag-slinging Hypebeast; ‘what’s this for?’ to which the human box logo billboard yells ‘Nike’s dropping their Dior collab’ being sure to pronounce it “Nikey” like the American that they truly are not and leaving the now bamboozled boomer wondering what the hell “Nikey” is, what “dropping” means, what “collab” could be short for and what a perfume company could have to do with any of this.   

While this tired old narrative of fashion consumerism and the generational divide has been lost to the health crisis, the highly competitive process of online raffles has continued on as a non-contact option. 

For those of you who have not managed to cultivate an unhealthy obsession with throwing money you don’t have at exclusive limited sneakers and may be unfamiliar with the raffle concept it can be summed up simply: You enter a draw where a predetermined number of winners are randomly selected, and they then receive the opportunity to purchase the sneakers in question. It’s a process which has been employed to make the buying experience as  equitable as possible and combat the physical fights which have been known to break out in queues at sneaker releases. One only has to look at the chaos that erupted at the release of the Sean Wotherspoon Air Max 1/97 to glimpse the disappointment fans feel when they queue days prior only to have the event shut down by police. During the pandemic it has made the transition to completely online drops smoother and simpler, being a process avid consumers were already familiar with. 

However, in some instances, brands have gone even further to postpone releases altogether until they can be carried out in person when bans on physical gatherings are lifted. Most notably, Nike has postponed the release of the Dior x Air Jordan collaboration. This shoe will retail at over $3000AUD, a price point which possibly prompted the brand to wait until they could do a full-scale drop complete with celebrity features, physical launches and release parties worldwide. 

This decision has proven controversial for Nike, as the unveiling of the Dior Air Jordan earlier this year was met with negativity amongst the community for not being imaginative enough, and not progressing the sneaker scene in any memorable way. While every Nike collaboration is well placed and enacted with the intention of promoting sales and brand awareness, devout sneaker lovers are usually happy to overlook the money mongering side of the business and focus on creativity and meaning. However, since this highly anticipated collaboration was with a respected luxury fashion house, the lacklustre final product appeared to capitalise upon the Dior branding as a fad more than a creative collaboration, or a shoe which paid its respects to the culture surrounding a sneaker, resulting in many deflated sneakerheads who wanted to love it but were left un-moved by the design.